# Chapter 9

## Hierarchical Models

### Contents

9.1. A Single Coin from a Single Mint

​	9.1.1. Posterior via grid approximation

9.2. Multiple Coins from a Single Mint

​	9.2.1. Posterior via grid approximation

​	9.2.2. A realistic model with MCMC

​	9.2.3. Doing it with JAGS

​	9.2.4. Example: Therapeutic touch

9.3. Shrinkage in Hierarchical Models

9.4. Speeding up JAGS

9.5. Extending the Hierarchy: Subjects Within Categories

​	9.5.1. Example: Baseball batting abilities by position

9.6. Exercises



> Oh darlin, for love, it's on you I depend.
>
> Well, I s'pose Jack Daniels is also my friend.
>
> But you keep him locked up in the ladies' loo,
>
> S'pose that means his spirits depend on you too.

Hierarchical models are mathematical descriptions involving multiple parameters such that the credible values of some parameters meaningfully depend on the values of other parameters. For example, consider several coins minted from the same factory. A head-biased factory will tend to produce head-biased coins. If we denote the bias of the factory by ω (Greek letter omega), and we denote the biases of the coins as θ s (where the subscript indexes different coins), then the credible values of θ s depend on the values of ω. The estimate of the bias of any one coin depends on the estimate of factory bias, which is influenced by the data from all the coins. There are many realistic situations that involve meaningful hierarchical structure. Bayesian modeling software makes it straightforward to specify and analyze complex hierarchical models. This chapter begins with the simplest possible case of a hierarchical model and then incrementally scaffolds to more complex hierarchical structures.